thanks again
Joey uh our next talk just
before the or you can just start if you
want me to leave um just before the the
panel discussion is by uh Mel or Michael
Anka he's going to speak about datal lad
Beyond git connecting to the rest of the
world and Michael is uh kind of the
second also dual founder of datal lad
and it's based at the research center
Yul in Germany where he leads the psycho
informatics group and his work is fueled
by the desire to prove people wrong that
say things like this cannot be done
welcome
Michael thank
you now I know all right so um thank you
to the previous speakers for for you
know homing in on the topic and and I
think this this connects uh in
interesting ways um I want to start off
with the the acknowledgements uh you've
seen a variant of that slide already um
the everything that we're talking about
here in terms of data is now uh there's
not just a software surface and
functionality surface but there's also a
huge people surface um I Haven counted
in a long time but it has been over 100
people that contributed in any sort of
way to the the datal um ecosystem uh
besides the money and the the various
initiatives that that started to trust
at some point to to to use that system
and it's really important because it
enables this whole thing right it's
there's the money but there's also the
why am I doing this and not something
else um okay so a few bits on on on the
mindset um that where this talk is
coming from so for me um verion control
um is is not just a technical tool but
it's also a safety layer and organizer
around processing people it makes me do
things and not fear that something goes
wrong it makes me also trust people to
the degree that they need to be trusted
What would without you know verification
possibilities right so that's nice and
and everything that that we do um that I
do is is basically a collaborative
process so this is is at the very core
interacting with people interacting with
with uh external entities uh and and
without that there's no no innovation
and at the same time uh I'm really
really interested in in doing things
sustainably and and that at the very
least means I can do it twice and you
know in all flavors of of of doing it
twice and many things that are happening
in in Academia in Academia that you can
watch that are celebrated as an
invention I don't want to step on
anybody's toes but it I doubt that they
could be done twice and and and so so
doing less and trusting and being on a
foundation that you can trust is is
really important to me and so data light
in some sense is is a productivity tool
for a distributed world where the
expertise is distributed people are
distributed services are distributed
anything's distributed and really wants
to root itself in in the whole ways of
the workings of the free software uh
movement so um I want to present you the
data World model as it has been so far
and and in principle and I I hope you
you already got the impression datal is
pretty much an orchestrator for G and
git anex right so in in uh if you if you
read the handbook if you if you listen
to the talks then the way uh we we
present data it it's basically datal
data set is a git repo that has a git
Annex and and if you use datet then it
it it calls the right commands in in git
and git Annex to do the data thing right
but basically there are two worlds
inside it that are nested um that is the
git world and there's the git Annex
world and interestingly the git world is
much smaller than the git Annex world
and you've heard about the the special
remote protocols Etc right so G anex can
essentially talk to the internet right
as as a whole there are some places
that it can talk to but most places it
can talk to and the other places you can
simply Implement that little thing and
then it talks to them too so that's
really cool and but but that basic setup
also comes with um with some questions
that that need to be answered and uh and
there actually quite a lot right so
where does the stuff go where does the
git stuff go where does the data stuff
go how are they connected how they are
orchestrated if I put you know get the
repository part which is which is
essentially just information on what is
the data and where is it right and then
I need to deposit the data and then I
need to take care of who gets access to
which part of it under which conditions
then those need to be synchronized so in
in from the data perspective it's really
nice that there's GID and there's GID
Annex from the data user perspective
it's actually really complicated right
and everybody who's tried that setting
up a system that really works with
people and existing work close knows
that it's complicated right so and and
and there are a bunch of you know
solutions that you can you can recommend
uh one of the solutions is just put them
in the same place right if you only use
one system um for for the the basically
metadata parts of it and and the data
then everything becomes simple and you
can do you know self-hosted git
repositories with an NX right G anx
supports that natively and then data is
just a little bit of icing on the on the
cake there's really nothing else sry
about you could use uh something like
git lfs um which please don't take that
as a recommendation I don't like it at
all I think it's it's it's not suitable
for for the the data flows uh that that
we observe and then of course there are
systems uh that happen to also settle on
the same uh principle so for example the
the the Gin repository um that you could
you could roll out yourself is basically
a GX with G anex support and that's it's
really popular and I suspect it's really
popular because it solves that you know
complexity problem right you do have one
thing uh unfortunately also comes with
its own complexities so but it's it's
it's a nice uh it's a nice solution
sadly uh it it's limiting right so the
git part as I mentioned already the git
world is much smaller than the git Annex
world right so so if you're if you're
recommending the system just use
something that can deal with Git and git
anex simultaneously then you're
excluding more or less the entire cloud
storage world which is um which is
something that most institutions provide
to to to their members so that would be
the easy thing that you don't have to
worry about because it's given to you as
a as a service or they have uh git
services that are just you know G for
code because they can't deal with
anything sizable um and so on right so
uh Joey mentioned already get NX export
but that's just a Handover basically a
deposit for people to consume the thing
and is withholding most of the
advantages that you get if your if your
data is uh tracked by by ganex so um and
then data light provides a solution to
that so we have an orchestration layer
where you can say well I know all these
places right and if you push here then
it also synchronizes that one but but
again it's it's just Paving over the
complexity that is inside in some sense
so is that good enough no right and and
and and sometimes in the documentation
you see as an advantage well if you
separate the metadata from the actual
data then you can also separate the
access and that gives you more fine
control about you know whatever the
thing but but if you think about it for
anyone who needs to get access to the
data it's still again just additional
complexity because you have to manage
that separately although that might not
even be a use case for you right so the
the the core of this thing is there is
complexity that that is not very um
desirable so in the true data way and
and Yari called it an Abomination uh we
we have been going on about this and and
for a few years now there's a thing
called uh data Annex and that is the
first git remote helper that is uh that
is shipped with uh with d extension uh
package and if you don't know what a get
remote helper is and you already heard
about it you can just call a thing get
something something and then kid knows
about it right in this case it's Kit
remote I think that's it and then some
name and then you can you can start
doing things like get push to this thing
simply by prefixing uh the the location
URL with some name in this case it's
it's stale at NX colon colon and then
something and then it does it all inside
whatever it's doing and what this
particular git remote helper is doing is
it lets git talk over git Annex so we're
basically if you if you need to deposit
a git repository data data set or any
git repository really um then you can
you you can do git Fetch and git push
operations through git anex so that
means you can you can deposit and
retrieve uh git repositories from any
place that git anex can talk to which is
basically any place and and the way it
does that is uh it exploits basically
the entire uh feature set of of of ganex
so it it has a I think this is this one
so this is this is what it does inside
I'll just very briefly
um if you have a local uh a local gate
Repository and you you can you can
register a specific uh remote by URL and
I'll show you a couple of examples in a
second to to to give you a sense of how
uh widely applicable that is what it
will do is it will maintain a local
mirror repository of that
remote and if you want to actually put
that onto the remote what it will do is
it will create yet another git Annex
repository inside that contains two
magic keys X Dr DL Keys using a custom
git anex back end and for those who
think what is he talking about right uh
this is this is you know usually you can
you can see them up there on on the left
usually um data blops content blops are
G anex keys and they're tracked by some
sort of content uh check sum this is a
magic G anex backend that you can
implement we implement it uh and it only
supports two keys you can see them up
there refs and repo tax boort and they
will always contain the list of
references that are in the git
repository and a compressed um git
repository bare git repository in a zip
file right so so they completely violate
the usual idea of a backend because
their content changes all the time but
their location is always the same so you
can what you can do and and so just to
complete that picture if you if you
fetch it just reads whatever is up there
Compares it to the local state downloads
it re extracts it and then you have two
G git processes that run on your local
system to talk to each other and
everything will work g style you have
conflict resolution and whatnot uh all
the same and if you if you upload it
just uploads it right that's it and and
so I'll give you a few um few examples
of these URLs I hope you can uh you you
can read them so the the only thing to
understand here is that there is a
complex URL
and then you can do get push and G fetch
that's that's the basic message and what
you what you can see in these URLs is
they all start with data nx- colon colon
right that is what trig makes git talk
to that special program that is shipped
with with datal and then the rest of the
URL can look really weird in all kinds
of ways but it's basically URL encoded
list of git anex uh external remote uh
initialization parameters right so this
whole thing works with any git an remote
the ones that Joey wrote the the ones
that we wrote and the ones that anybody
else wrote right because it it it uses
the all the standard interfaces that
you've heard about and so you can you
can you can uh deposit a git repository
on a data verse uh instance that's the
second one or in a in an S3 bucket or
you you place it somewhere zipped on a
on a web server so the the possibilities
are really infinite right this slide
doesn't capture uh the breadth of what
you can do because we don't even know
what the full list of kit anx uh special
remote is that exist but this is
compatible with with with all of them so
what this does I need to check the time
nice um so what this does is this is not
a replacement for proper kit hosting
right so if you're collaborating with
150 people and you do pull requests and
whatnot this is not for you but what
this is good for is you can now deposit
the repository part which is the entire
evolution of a data set right all the
provence information that that we all
already briefly heard about in the same
place where the data is and you manage
it exactly like the rest of the data
these are all NX keys or exported files
right so this uh thing also supports
export
mode uh so you can have a human readable
representation of a data set that
provides you one or more versions of the
data files including the entire history
in terms of metadata and everybody could
be pointed to uh a URL and they can
simply get clone that or data clone that
verb them given that they have that uh
extension installed and that works uh
with G anex since uh many years ago and
it's shipped in the datet next extension
package so so so that's nice it's solves
some of the problems uh but if you if
you're thinking about the longevity
aspect of all of this right then that's
uh on many people's minds um and here is
an example uh threat on on masdon that
basically comes down to yeah dat light
it might be the nicest thing that we
have in signs for for for for data
management but it's is really complex
and it comes with anount uncountable
number of python uh code and it's just
too much right that's I don't want to
have that uh on my shoulders for you
know 10 20 years so that's true uh and
and but if we're thinking about it the
same is true for kit and kit anex Joey
just just made a scary statement uh that
went along the lines of I don't think
the kid NX needs to be developed forever
right and then everybody's shaking in
their core that's that's sitting there
and of but but we all know that it's
true right and also git right git has
been around for a while but not that
long right and we don't know how it's
going to develop right people have the
the attitude that it's you know too big
to fail and there will be some
transition we just don't know what it is
yet you know it's all good right but you
know imagine finding a CVS repository
from 1994 that points to some tape
drives now good luck making sense out of
that right and if you if you think about
get anex repository where you just need
to keep in mind that there's this other
branch that this tracks all these things
and it's related by keys that you just
need to keep in mind that they existed
to reestablish that connection then you
know hey I don't know if that translate
30 years forward right or
50 so I think what this boils down to is
that we want uh you know think about
data preservation demands and have a
description optimized record rather than
use optimized record but at the same
same time we also want to keep using the
technology that we have today because we
have actual things to do right and and
so this is the future of data um uh as I
uh see it right now and I want to make
it called so the the I don't want to
spend too much time on this five minutes
yes uh exactly I will not spend too much
time on this so the data that that we
know is is in that box in here I called
it the data runtime data set and there
are things that you can do with data and
get anex uh on your machine and then you
do get Push Pull interact with all the
things everything that you already heard
about and many things that you uh that
you will uh hear about and then I think
what we should be doing uh in datalite
in the future is we should we should
draw a circle here and that's why that
idea of you know what's the surface the
desired surface of a tool uh for the for
the for the for the future and I think
this is this box that I that I labeled
decore and and the end of that surface
should be that you serialize the
information that's in that runtime
representation which right now happens
to be git repository with an Annex into
a data description and that data
description is is a proper metadata
record and the whole point uh would be
and metadata records have the same
problems as the git repository formats
right there are so many of them and they
all have advantages and disadvantages
and there's no one siiz withit all so
the IDE is to be able to serialize out
to whatever standard there is but to
have the API be a metadata API so to
have in data uh a recognized schema how
you can describe things and then we
stick to that schema and have it be
versioned like everything else in in
datal and then everybody else can have a
translator to whatever is the standard
of the day and that whole system is
mirrored also on the other side so you
can you can have a translation of
whatever your favorite standard is into
that description
schema um and then you can use datal and
get anx and git while they exist but
outside of that system you will have
data files maybe objects it doesn't
really matter they sit somewhere and you
have a uh standardized probably textual
uh description of the information that's
in there that is relevant to you and
that might be a subset of what's what's
in the in the runtime version and when
the lifetime of that runtime data data
set ends for you it could be different
right it could be you know after five
minutes at the end of a compute job or
it could be after 10 years after you
finally abandon a project right it
doesn't matter but but there is an end
of of life for for everyone so and that
metadata schema is a key uh key aspect
here and if you if you're brave enough
you could go to concepts of data.org and
see it evolve so it's it has the version
unreleased right now and that's for a
reason but the idea is basically there
is a schema definition and it's a schema
it's not an ontology vocabulary Etc many
many people are working on this for
decades right so it's there's nothing
that needs to be touched we just need to
agree on a particular structure of that
information to come out in order to be
able to develop software that that
really works fast enough and uh it's
fully you know annotated so you can you
can rdf uh serialize it and it it sits
on
uh on a on a few very few um you know
standardized um ways of composing
metadata from the um from profo to to
decad uses a tool called um link ML and
what it can do is it can capture the the
the the actual complexity of a
multiversion data data set in the form
of a kit repository so basically it's
some sort of an alternative for G gits
fast export in some it's not it's not I
take that back it's not an alternative
but conceptually it's similar to that um
and and and what makes it different from
others is that the primary entity being
described is file content right it's not
the usual here we have a data set and
then this is parts and parts and parts
and parts but the the primary content is
uh a file blob right so the one of the
one of the thought uh models was that it
should fit into G annexes metadata
system right without having to have a
negotiation with with with Joey just
just fit right in there and that's um
that's what it does the um the other
aspect I need to be quick is that
everything has a globally unique
identifier and there are some shortcuts
that are made in there that actually
makes this practically feasible so you
don't need to talk to registry and and
all that in order to compose these uh
these metadata things this is too small
so I'm what it shows
it that there's a metadata record up top
there and maybe I can be really quick no
I cannot be quick uh that contains no
identifiers what you what maybe you
check the slides later on um what it
shows is that without specifying any
versions uh Etc in a record that you
would store in a data data set you can
serialize out an rdf report that could
go into a graph store for data uh
Discovery and and and all that that
contains properly versioned records that
allow you to identify things across
evolving uh uh data sets all the time
and and there are examples online that
show you how to do that for BL git blobs
trees commits NX Keys NX remotes data
data sets Publications studies subjects
research topics instruments whatever uh
without actually blowing up the number
of uh metadata classes that you need to
have in in in in order to do that so as
I said that's uh that's work in progress
but what I want to end with is the idea
that what this does it it reduces the
complexity of interfacing with with data
so we basically settle on two relevant
interfaces only one is purely metadata
right so if we can translate a metadata
record to that schema and back then
we're compatible with whatever other
Discovery system that is out there and
there are quite a few and the other one
is the G anex special remote protocol
because we can describe what what that
thing needs to be doing in terms of this
is a piece of software that lets you
talk to this when you give it that
identifier right so we need to take care
of the G anex special remote protocol
and we need to take care of that schema
development and and they are both non-
datal in some sense and they can be
understood without having to understand
data and that is what I meant by you
know a smaller more trustworthy
Foundation I'm not saying that I don't
trust datal LED I I do since 2015 uh and
but but having to take care of less
is is is trustworthy more trustworthy
and with that change we also change the
the requirements for what an optimal
system is that can host that type of
information and we changed it to
something that most institutions uh and
even the commercial Cloud already has
right we we need to put a file content
blob somewhere and we need to be able to
attach metadata to it and that
attachment could just be by referencing
a second blob somewhere in that same
system right and that's and that's it
and at the same time we stay compatible
with the g g at git anex world in the
exact same way and you can use uh and be
in that ecosystem for as long as it's
beneficiary or beneficial uh to you and
with that I want to end that and um not
take up more time for our uh discussion
thank
you